---

layout: post

title: Reflecting on a hospital visit

---

My dad was in the hospital for the last ten days
and just got out as I write this (February 24, his
birthday).  I spent as much time there at the
hospital as I felt I could get away with, which
turned out to be on the order of four or five
hours most days; I'm grateful I have the
flexibility in my life to do things like that when
it seems important, and my job doesn't get in the
way.  It feels a bit awful to be around for such a
trying time without any ability to really help,
but My dad certainly appreciated the company, and
that's good enough for me.

Part of why it felt so important to be there is
that being in a hospital setting clearly disrupts
a person's mental health.  It's
[common](sunsetting) for patients to exhibit
confusion and paranoia, especially older patients,
and particularly when confined to a clinical
setting for long periods of time.  The staff have
various techniques to keep patients suffering from
this mental state from presenting a safety risk to
themselves or others, but these techniques are
ultimately about restraint, and that additional
restraint just exacerbates the feeling of
entrapment and paranoia.

In other words, left unchecked, a patient's mental
instability induces a response from the staff
which tends to cause _more_ instability in the
patient.  The existence of this feedback loop
makes it extraordinarily scary and dangerous.
There were moments this last week in which I was
very concerned that we'd start slipping over that
edge into a self-reinforcing nightmare.

Imagine an elderly person who has been living
independently for years, with little issue.
Imagine that they have some chronic health
concerns, but they've never had difficulty
managing it.  They shop for themselves, maintain
neighborly relationships, and live a healthy
independent life.  Now imagine that this person
has a single serious health issue and end up in a
hospital for two or three weeks - during this
time, they are often medicated, always in a
disorienting enclosed space, constantly without
any semblance of privacy, and rarely able to sleep
or rest.  It is not hard to imagine that this
person has an episode of confusion, in which they
think they are being imprisoned against their will
(is that even confusion?) and are subsequently
restrained, leading to more conviction they are
being mistreated, leading to more intensive
management, until finally the health episode is
over, but the individual is released into a
heavily managed nursing home.  There, instead of
the kind of environment that fostered their
independence previously, they may encounter more
alienating clinical treatment, less freedom, and
have less mental and emotional stimulation.

Nothing of the sort happened last week to my
family, but I did see a little bit how the
self-reinforcing trap of dependence can get
started.  Without doing some research I have no
idea how common the above nightmare scenario
really is, but its plausibility really concerns
me.  


[sunsetting]: (https://www.caring.com/blogs/older-patients-wiser-care/understanding-hospital-delirium-in-elderly-patients)

[modeline]: # ( vim: set spell formatoptions+=a textwidth=50 : )
