---
layout: post 
title: "Panama vacation notes" 
categories: travel books
---

Let's just catalogue the trip as it goes.

## January 30, 2017, morning

I'm on my way to Bastimentos, an island (or group
of islands?) in Panama's Bocas del Toro province.
For this trip, I decided fairly early on to keep
the travel portion as short as possible in order
to maximize my time in Bastimentos: flights only,
relatively short layovers.  This does mean that
the ratio of my "vacation time" to time away from
home is maximized, but it also means that I'll be
skirting many of the typical travel experiences
and seeing much less variety.  It means that I'm
having more experiences with airport staff and
fewer with taxi drivers; more with tourist
professionals and fewer with locals; more English
speaking, wealthy, comfortable; fewer Spanish,
diverse, and exciting.  Halfway through the trip
out, I feel as though I'm missing out on one of my
favorite parts of traveling, which is struggling
with and getting acclimated to another language.
On the other hand, this is easy.  Add that to the
pile of evidence that the easier a thing is, the
less desirable it probably is as well.

But it's easy, and I'll take it for now.

Last night, I got to Boston's Logan airport around
4pm.  Soon after, I read on twitter that a
significant protest had gathered around the
international terminal over the Trump
administration's executive order to prevent entry
to nationals from some Middle Eastern countries -
the so-called Seven Nations Ban.  Not until the
morning of the next day (as I write this in a
little cafe in the Panama City Albrook Airport)
did I find out that Customs agents had detained -
pursuant to the illegal executive order - two
UMass Darmouth professors at Logan as I sat there.
That hits so very close to home: I am an alumnus
of the UMass system, tons of friends went to UMD,
and these people were being held on the same
property I was sitting on.  Only last week, this
same sense of narrowly missing the opportunity to
be part of historic events hit me hard, during the
women's march, and it feels like an opportunity
lost.  I shouldn't be _near_ these historic
events, I should be _in_ them.  It feels cowardly
to desire to be part of history but to let it pass
by at such a close proximity.  Unfortunately, such
opportunities are coming fast and furious these
days: the President is an enemy to many of the
core political and moral values I hold, and I'm
far from alone.  I will have many more
opportunities to get involved directly and put
myself on the right side of history.

If you are traveling, you should be busy
experiencing _that_, not getting lost in the
Twittersphere back home thousands of miles away,
but here I am: four hours too early to check in
for my flight from Panama City to Bocas del Toro,
rabidly consuming all the media I can find from
the [local ACLU](ACLU-MA), thousands of miles
away.  What else could I be doing?  Looking up the
history of the [places](hist-noriega) I'm
[visiting](albrook) is a depressing look into my
nation's [imperialist past](hist-canal), while I'm
obsessing over the fight for its future.

Oh well.  Maybe I'll order a _cafe con leche_ in
Spanish this time while I refresh the page.

---

## Late morning

I've read the majority of _H Is for Hawk_ on this
leg of the journey - one of the perks of drawn-out
but uninvolved travel.  Macdonald has put together
a quite involved book, weaving a number of
distinct threads - the journey of raising a
goshawk and hunting with her, the death of her
father, and her commentary on the two famous
falconry-related British books of the last
century, _The Peregrine_ and _The Goshawk_; the
analysis of the latter - and its author, T. H.
White, who more famously wrote _The Once and
Future King_ - of which forms the basis for much
of her content.  The material, to me, hangs
together somewhat loosely, more like a collection
of essays assembled like a mixtape than a coherent
narrative, but that's not a serious problem.
There is just one thing that distracts me from
losing myself in the book.

To my mind, the framework of Sigmund Freud is to
psychology what Marx's is to political theory -
wonderfully capable of providing a stirring
narrative explanation, often illuminating and
always intriguing, but in the end, too broad of
application and too narrow of opinion to be
seriously considered as dependable frames of
reference.  By that, I mean it has a fairly small
and reductive set of rules, but can be applied in
a very wide range of critiques which perhaps
stretch those rules beyond their capacity, as
though it were a flat-bottomed boat designed for a
certain number of passengers but carrying many
more than could actually fit.  Macdonald's reading
of White's life is replete with Freudian analyses,
and what troubles me most is when it applies to
his homosexuality.  Somehow, at every turn,
White's brutal childhood metamorphoses into all of
his adult troubles: alcoholism, sadism,
pedophilia, angst over his impossible
homosexuality.  I _don't_ think Macdonald is
saying that somehow being unloved as a child
turned him gay, but I _do_ think she is saying
that his childhood is a critical part of his later
alcoholism, among other things.  The problem I
find with this kind of attempt to tie youthful
trauma to adult disorder is that it is ultimately
unscientific - how could one disprove the
hypothesis? - and so ultimately it gives us tools
for labeling various states of being as
pathologies to be explained by previous events.
In the particular case of alcoholism, I believe we
know emphatically that it is not simply a
phenomenon of the psyche, because it has a strong
genetic component (citation needed, I realize).
Without a great deal more rigor, what's to prevent
someone, using the same tools as Macdonald uses to
construct her commentary, from calling his
homosexuality a stress-induced pathology as well?

Not that this is stopping me in any way, mind you.
My flight to Bocas del Toro boards in an hour and
a half, and I expect I'll have finished the book
by the time I arrive.  There's much more I enjoy
in _H Is for Hawk_ than dislike.

---

In writing these notes, I've picked up on a few
vim commands I'm liable to continue to use:

```
set spell            " spell checking
set formatoptions+=a " format paragraphs as I type
set textwidth=50     " break at 50 chars
```

Thanks to [this article](modeline-source), now I've got a little `modeline` at the end as a fake link to retain these on the file:

```
[modeline]: # ( vim: set spell formatoptions+=a textwidth=50 : )
```

---

## Break in chronology

It's around 1pm on Sunday, February 5th.  I've
been trying or near an hour to put down some more
notes about the last week, but Mami, the
unofficial resident of Dan and Lily's place on
Bastimentos, has been much too affectionate for me
to write for some time now.  After being good and
itchy for long enough, I'm going to make a quick
run at an outline of the week, and then probably
fill in more later.  That may or may not happen.

---

## January 30, evening

I landed in Bocas del Toro airport a little after
1pm on Sunday, waited a little while for Steve and
Allison, then started walking into Bocas Town on
Isla Colon.  I met them on the way after a few
minutes of walking.  We continued in and met my
parents and Al and Marilyn at El Pirate restaurant
in town, where we had a couple of beers and I got
a beautiful whole red snapper with rice and a
salad.  This was the first really good meal I had,
which was followed by many more.  Everything I ate
here was pretty much fantastic.

We took the boat back to Bastimentos while it was
still light out and I saw Dan and Lily's place for
the first time.  It's right out on a point on the
island on the weather side, so it always has surf
rolling in and a cooling breeze.  It was always
between 25 and 30 C here (about 80-90), but here,
it was always comfortable.

We sat on my parents' porch for sunset, which was
beautiful, and then moved to the main porch.  We
had Dan, Lily, my parents, Steve and Allison, Bill
and Jessica (two Americans living on the island
for part of the year), Justin and Kelly (a younger
married couple staying at Dan's by chance), and a
guy named Calipso Joe.  We drank, played music,
and hung out there into the night.  My mom seemed
perfectly at home, which completely took me by
surprise, but my dad less so.  Just before he
left, Calipso Joe took offense to something my dad
said, and suffice it to say they didn't see
eye-to-eye after that.



[ACLU-MA]: ()

[albrook]: ()

[hist-noriega]: ()

[hist-canal]: ()

[modeline-source]: (https://davidjb.com/blog/2016/10/adding-a-vim-modeline-in-a-markdown-document/)

[modeline]: # ( vim: set spell formatoptions+=a textwidth=50 : )
