---
layout: post
title: Regarding scrum
---

Our work team just underwent a nearly week-long
training exercise.  Its intent was to formally
introduce our programming team to the principles
of Agile development.  The precise meaning of this
term "Agile" with respect to software development
is heavily disputed, but most people would agree
that, in general, "agile software development" is
a way of practicing software development that
de-emphasises up-front design and promotes rapid
iterations in which incremental improvements to
the project are produced and evaluated.

The impact of this movement has been massive and
its value is rarely disputed.  A number of
specific agile software development paradigms
paradigms have sprung up -- Scrum and Kanban chief
among them -- and with them, legions of books,
classes, and consultants.  I tend to refer to this
as "capital-A Agile" as distinct from "agile";
Ferris Bueller would have suggested his distrust
by referring to it as just another "ism".


## The agency of teams

Wherein I complain about the fact that "Agile"
purports to give decision making power to
developers, while simultaneously fully
disenfranchising them from the decision making
process.

## At what cost?

Wherein I complain about the dirty psychological
tricks played in our Agile indoctrination.

[manifesto]: (http://FIXME.com)

[modeline]: # ( vim: set spell formatoptions+=a textwidth=50 : )
